                                             Is Functional Correctness Enough to Evaluate Code Language Models?
                                                            Exploring Diversity of Generated Codes

                                                    Heejae Chon1∗ , Seonghyeon Lee2∗, Jinyoung Yeo1 , Dongha Lee1
                                                    1
                                                      Yonsei University, 2 Pohang University of Science and Technology
                                             {0914eagle,jinyeo,donalee}@yonsei.ac.kr, sh0416@postech.ac.kr



                                                                   Abstract                                                        Reasoning Path 1
                                                                                                                                   Reasoning Path 2
                                              Language models (LMs) have exhibited impres-                                         Reasoning Path 3
                                              sive abilities in generating codes from natural          Complex           LM        Reasoning Path 4   Correct
                                              language requirements. In this work, we high-          Reasoning Task                                   Answer

arXiv:2408.14504v1 \[cs.SE\] 24 Aug 2024

                                                                                                                                   def Merge_Sort:
                                              light the diversity of code generated by LMs as
                                                                                                                                   def Tim_Sort:
                                              a critical criterion for evaluating their code gen-
                                                                                                                                   def Quick_Sort:
                                              eration capabilities, in addition to functional
                                                                                                        Coding        Code LM      def Bubble_Sort:   Correct
                                              correctness. Despite its practical implications,          Problem                                        Code
                                              there is a lack of studies focused on assessing
                                              the diversity of generated code, which over-          Figure 1: In complex code generation tasks, utilizing
                                              looks its importance in the development of code       diversity encoded in LMs help generate correct outputs.
                                              LMs. We propose a systematic approach to
                                              evaluate the diversity of generated code, utiliz-
                                              ing various metrics for inter-code similarity as         Beyond the significant success of LMs in gen-
                                              well as functional correctness. Specifically, we      erating functionally correct codes, the diversity of
                                              introduce a pairwise code similarity measure          generated code represents another promising cri-
                                              that leverages large LMs’ capabilities in code
                                                                                                    terion for evaluating the model’s code generation
                                              understanding and reasoning, demonstrating
                                              the highest correlation with human judgment.          abilities, for the following reasons: First of all,
                                              We extensively investigate the impact of var-         the ability to generate diverse, correct solutions
                                              ious factors on the quality of generated code,        using different approaches for a given problem in-
                                              including model sizes, temperatures, training         dicates that the model truly understands the essen-
                                              approaches, prompting strategies, and the diffi-      tial requirements and can implement the codes in
                                              culty of input problems. Our consistent obser-        various ways to fulfill them. For instance, incor-
                                              vation of a positive correlation between the test     porating diverse reasoning paths during training
                                              pass score and the inter-code similarity score
                                                                                                    significantly enhances the code generation capabil-
                                              indicates that current LMs tend to produce func-
                                              tionally correct code with limited diversity.         ities of LMs (Wang et al., 2024). This aligns with
                                                                                                    recent studies that emphasize the importance of di-
                                         1    Introduction                                          verse reasoning paths in enhancing LMs’ reasoning
                                         Language models (LMs) pre-trained on massive-              capabilities (Zhou et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2022), as
                                         scale code corpora show remarkable performance             illustrated in Figure 1.
                                         in generating codes from natural language require-            Moreover, code LMs are rapidly finding diverse
                                         ments. Extensive research has explored various             applications these days, and the diversity of the
                                         methods to enhance the functional correctness of           generated code, a fundamental quality metric, is
                                         code generated by these models (Austin et al., 2021;       directly influencing software ecosystems. A report
                                         Wang et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021). As a result,        identifies that with the emergence of AI coding as-
                                         recent benchmarks assessing the functional correct-        sistants, i.e., Copilot,1 there has been an increasing
                                         ness of generated code (Ben Allal et al., 2022) show       trend of repetitive code uploads on GitHub (Hard-
                                         that 4 out of 5 generated codes pass all test cases,       ing and Kloster, 2024); this trend incurs the degra-
                                         confirming their accuracy (Guo et al., 2024). This         dation of software ecosystems by violating a princi-
                                         success highlights the potential of LMs to generate        ple of software development, DRY (Don’t Repeat
                                         code from high-level specifications.                       Yourself ).
                                              ∗                                                        1
                                                  Equal contribution                                       https://github.com/features/copilot

Nevertheless, there exists scarce studies evaluat- interpretable
scoring. Through experiments, we ing the diversity of generated codes,
which disre- validate that this LLM-based measure has a much gards its
importance in developing code LMs. Most stronger correlation with human
evaluation com- evaluation benchmarks focus only on their func- pared to
other measures. tional correctness without quantifying the variety
Extensive evaluation of two benchmark datasets of mechanisms inside
their implementations (Chen of varying difficulty levels demonstrate
clear and et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2021). As a result, consistent
trends in code diversity and functional considerable efforts have been
directed towards en- correctness across various factors. Key observa-
hancing code LMs with a lack of emphasis on code tions include: (1) As
the difficulty of an input diversity (Zheng et al., 2023). This can
overlook problem increases, the diversity of generated codes the
potential capability of code LMs or the practical also increases across
all types of code LMs. (2) impact of their generated codes.
Instruction-tuned models tend to generate more In this work, we aim to
systematically analyze similar codes than their base models, resulting
in the behavior of competitive code LMs through the limited improvement
of Pass@K as K increases. lens of the diversity of their generated
codes. To (3) Both decreasing the temperature and adopting this end, we
present a unified framework to eval- enhanced reasoning strategies, such
as Few-Shot uate the code generation ability of various LMs, Chain of
Thought (CoT) Prompting (Kim et al., while introducing novel metrics
that jointly investi- 2023) , lead to increased inter-code similarity.
For gate both code similarity and functional correctness.
reproducibility, our codes are publicly available.2 Based on our
evaluation framework and compre- The main contributions can be
summarized as hensive metrics, we look into the impact of vari- follows:
ous factors that can affect the quality of generated • This is the first
study to thoroughly investigate codes, including model sizes,
temperature param- the diversity of codes generated by code LMs, a
eters, training approaches (i.e., instruction-tuned topic that has been
largely overlooked. or not), prompting strategies, and difficulties of
an • We present a systematic approach to code diver- input problem
(i.e., functional requirements). sity evaluation, including a
reasoning-based pair- Our new metrics primarily focus on K sam- wise
code similarity measure and comprehensive pled codes, similar to the
conventional metric for metrics for K sampled codes. functional
correctness (i.e., Pass@K). Specifically, • From extensive experiments,
we observe that ex- we introduce two similarity scores, Sim@K and isting
code LMs tend to generate functionally CSim@K, which measure inter-code
similarity correct codes with limited diversity. and inter-code
similarity conditioned on functional correctness, respectively. We also
propose a cor- 2 Related Work rectness score, DPass@K, which quantifies
func- 2.1 Code Generation with Language Models tional correctness by
counting the number of cor- rect codes, with DPass further assigning
weights Recently, there have been notable improvements based on their
diversity. in code generation tasks due to the great advances in
language models (LMs). Austin et al. (2021) We incorporate a variety of
views for pair- and Chen et al. (2021) initially introduced LMs for wise
code similarity into our evaluation frame- synthesizing a program and
demonstrated their ca- work, which are token-based, embedding-based,
pability by evaluating the functional correctness and reasoning-based
approaches. In particular, of generated codes through the unit test.
With pointing out that existing similarity measures can- this evaluation
protocol, researchers have devel- not effectively capture high-level
code architectures oped the open-source models pre-trained on mas-
(e.g., algorithm or logic), we introduce a solid ap- sive code corpora
(Roziere et al., 2023; Li et al., proach to utilize LLMs' ability of
code understand- 2023; Guo et al., 2024) or designed prompt engi- ing
and reasoning. Inspired by the recent success of neering techniques to
elicit their code generation LLM-based evaluation in text generation
(Liu et al., capabilities (Kojima et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022;
2023b), we prompt LLMs to thoroughly measure Ridnik et al., 2024),
verifying their effectiveness the similarity given a code pair, while
considering on code generation tasks. the hierarchy of code-related
concepts; to this end, 2 we provide detailed instructions as guidance
for https://github.com/0914eagle/Code-Diversity  Another research
direction focuses on rigorously tional correctness, enabling an
investigation into evaluating the code generation capability by in- the
trade-off between these two aspects. creasing the number of test cases
to assess func- tional correctness (Liu et al., 2023a) or by enhanc- 3.1
Pairwise Code Similarity Measurement ing the requirements to verify
robustness in un- We present three different approaches for modeling
derstanding natural language specifications (Wang the proximity between
two pieces of codes, captur- et al., 2023). Additionally, ? evaluates
the quality ing various levels of code characteristics, such as of
generated codes with various factors to assess the lexical, syntactical,
semantical, and logical similar- model's ability to meet user demands.
In this work, ities. we propose a crucial yet often overlooked aspect of
code generation capability, i.e., code diversity, by 3.1.1 Token-based
similarity introducing a novel evaluation procedure, which The first
approach to measuring pairwise code sim- has not been adequately
addressed by the research ilarity is to use off-the-shelf clone code
detectors community. that mainly rely on lexical similarity between
codes. In this work, we employ a popular open-source de- 2.2 Similarity
Measure between Codes tector , SourcererCC (Sajnani et al., 2016), which
Predicting the semantic relevance between two determines if two pieces
of code are the same by codes has been a long-standing research topic in
primarily considering their token-based proximity. code clone detection
tasks (Feng et al., 2020; Lu Notably, to effectively handle the presence
of com- et al., 2021; Zakeri-Nasrabadi et al., 2023). Espe- ments, which
frequently appear within code but cially, Roy and Cordy (2007) designed
criteria for do not affect its functionality, SourcererCC auto- code
similarity measure with varying levels from matically detects the
comments and removes them matching exact codes to consider the
functional before comparing the two codes. We use its binary equivalence
between two syntactically different predictions (i.e., 0 for non-copy
code, 1 for copy codes. With these levels, a variety of techniques code)
with a pre-specified threshold as the measure have been developed to
measure code similarity, of token-based similarity. e.g., token-based
(Sajnani et al., 2016), learning- 3.1.2 Embedding-based similarity based
(Zakeri-Nasrabadi and Parsa, 2022), or hy- As a pairwise code similarity
measure, another ap- brid techniques (Perez and Chiba, 2019). Another
proach that captures the semantics within code us- approach relies on
LMs' code understanding capa- ing pre-trained code encoders is
considered. Specif- bility by prompting them to detect clones between
ically, we compute the contextualized embeddings two generated programs
(Dou et al., 2023). Build- of codes by employing the bi-directional
encoder ing on this line of research, we integrate these simi- (Reimers
and Gurevych, 2019), using their co- larity measures into a unified
framework (Figure 2) sine similarity as the measure. To acquire em- and
develop an enhanced similarity measure with beddings familiar with code,
we use an encoder large LMs while focusing on the criteria from Roy
further trained on code search datasets (Husain and Cordy (2007) to
estimate the diversity of gen- et al., 2019).3 Similar to token-based
similarity, erated codes and inspect them in a multifaceted comments are
removed manually before evaluating view. code similarity. 3 Methods
3.1.3 Reasoning-based similarity In this section, we present a
systematic approach To focus on the core architecture of codes (e.g.,
al- to evaluate the code generation ability of LMs in gorithm and logic)
instead of superficial code texts terms of code diversity. First, we
introduce several and their semantics, we propose a novel similarity
pairwise code similarity measures that focus on measure that comprehends
and contrasts codes with different aspects and various levels of
code-related the help of the reasoning ability of large language
concepts within a given code pair. Using these pair- models (LLMs).
Motivated by the pioneering work wise similarity measures, we then
design a metric that commands powerful language models to evalu- that
efficiently captures the similarity of K gen- ate the quality of
generated texts (Liu et al., 2023b), erated codes. Finally, we devise a
novel metric 3 https://huggingface.co/flax-sentence-embeddings/st- that
jointly considers both code diversity and func-
codesearch-distilroberta-base  K Sampled Codes Pairwise Code Similarity
Measurement def count_ways(N, M, blue_params): MOD = 100003 Similar code
semantics def count_ways_to_paint(N, M, blue_params): total_ways = 1 dp
= \[\[0\] \* (M+1) for \_ in range(N+1)\] dp\[0\]\[0\] = 1 for i in
range(N): total_ways \*= (M -- blue_params\[i\] -- i) for i in range(1,
N+1): total_ways %= 100003 for j in range(M+1): ... dp\[i\]\[j\] =
(dp\[i\]\[j\] + dp\[i-1\]\[j\]) % MOD return total_ways, total_ways %
100003 if j \>= blue_params\[i-1\]: dp\[i\]\[j\] = (dp\[i\]\[j\] +
dp\[i\]\[j-blue\_⋯ N, M = map(int, input().split()) blue_params =
list(map(int, input().split())) total_ways = dp\[N\]\[M\] X = total_ways
// MOD X, Y = count_ways_to_paint(N, M, blue_params) Problem Y =
total_ways % MOD print(X, Y) return X, Y Different algorithms ... N, M =
map(int, input().split()) Sim@K Token-based similarity blue_params =
list(map(int, input().split()))

                               CSim@K            Embedding-based similarity                   X, Y = count_ways(N, M, blue_params)
                                                                                              print(X, Y)
    Code LM                    …                    Reasoning-based similarity                                        Identical code snippet

Figure 2: The evaluation pipeline for an LM's code generation ability in
terms of inter-code similarity (i.e., a negative indicator of diversity)
while focusing on its K generated codes, termed as Sim@K. We adopt three
different approaches to pairwise code similarity evaluation, which are
based on (1) token-based (2) embedding-based, and (3) reasoning-based
similarity measures.

                     Defines the overall solution                        mantics (Figure 3); this offers clear guidelines, es-
       Algorithm     strategy
                                                                         pecially for the more ambiguous scores of 2, 3, and
                     Implements the algorithm with                       4. It is worth noting that expertise in programming,
          Logic      conditional statements and loops
                                                                         i.e., understanding the aspects that make two codes
                     Manages the sequence of
          Flow       execution
                                                                         similar to each other, is crucial for accurately distin-
                                                                         guishing between different levels of similarity. Key
                     Organizes the code into functions,
        Structure    classes, and modules
                                                                         descriptions for each score are presented in Table 1,
                                                                         and the full prompt is provided in Appendix A.1.
                     Determines the behavior and
       Semantics     meaning of the code
                                                                           Score       Description

Figure 3: Code-related concepts and their hierarchy Exact Copy:
Identical in all aspects (code structure, 5 logic, algorithm, comments,
whitespaces). from a software engineering perspective. Minor
Modifications: Trivial changes (variable names, 4 literals, comments)
but same structure and logic. Simple Changes: Core logic and algorithms
preserved we design a prompt specialized in the coding do- 3 with simple
control/data flow changes (loop types, main and ask LLMs to rate the
similarity between order of conditionals). two codes while grounding the
detailed guidelines Substantial Modifications: Core algorithm maintained
2 with significant changes (extensive comment in the prompt. As the
evaluator, we use GPT-4, modifications, rearranged/removed code blocks).
which effectively follows instructions and demon- Completely Different:
Entirely different logic and strates remarkable performance in code
understand- 1 structure (no similarity in code structure, control flow,
and data representation). ing and reasoning tasks, such as code
summariza- tion, generation, editing, debugging, and feedback Table 1:
Summary of pairwise code similarity criteria generation (Bubeck et al.,
2023). for the scores (1-5), based on varying levels of code Our prompt
is designed to evaluate input code component similarity. pairs by their
similarity on a scale from 1 to 5, em- phasizing code understanding and
reasoning. To provide detailed explanations for each score, which 3.2
Similarity Metric for K Sampled Codes facilitates in-context prompting
(Lampinen et al., Based on the pairwise code similarity measures, 2022),
we focus on the hierarchy of code design, we define a quantitative
metric for evaluating LM's clarifying the hierarchical relationship of
various code generation ability in terms of similarity. Simi-
code-related concepts with different granularity, lar to conventional
metrics for functional correct- such as algorithm, logic, flow,
structure, and se- ness (e.g., Pass@K) that focus on the codes gen-
erated via K repetitive sampling, our similarity 4 Experiments metric
named Sim@K mainly assesses the inter- code similarity in the set of K
implementations. In this section, we extensively analyze the imple-
Formally, for each problem (or functional require- mentations generated
by the code LMs with the ment) and LM parameters θ, we first obtain the
following research questions about code diversity. set of K generated
codes, CK = {ck ∼ pθ (·)\|k = • RQ1: Can recent code LMs generate
sufficiently 1, . . . , K}, then we simply compute the average of
diverse solutions to specific problems? all pairwise code similarities
within the code set.4 • RQ2: Is there a correlation between the
diversity Given any pairwise code similarity measure sim(·, and
correctness of the generated codes? ·) in Section 3.1, the overall code
similarity score • RQ3: Do advanced code generation strategies at K
sampled results, Sim@K, is obtained by enhance both code diversity and
correctness? Sim@K = E sim(ck , ck′ ). (1) 4.1 Experimental Setup ck
,ck′ ∼CK

Note that this inter-code similarity metric serves Datasets We utilize
two representative datasets as a negative indicator of the inter-code
diversity that cover diverse coding problems for code gen- metric.
Therefore, in this paper, we use the terms eration tasks: APPS
(Hendrycks et al., 2021) and "diversity" and "similarity"
interchangeably when HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021). Both datasets are
describing a quality aspect of the generated codes. designed to ask the
models to implement Python programs based on the requirements written by
nat- 3.3 Joint Metric for K Sampled Codes: ural languages. In
particular, APPS categorize their Similarity and Functional Correctness
problems into three difficulty levels, i.e., Introduc- To thoroughly
evaluate LMs' code generation abil- tory, Interview, and Competition,
and we report the ity while jointly considering both similarity and
score separately to identify whether the diversity functional
correctness, we introduce novel met- of generated codes varies depending
on their diffi- rics to evaluate the K generated codes based on culty.
HumanEval consists of basic Python coding (1) inter-code similarity
conditioned on their cor- problems with the function format where the
doc- rectness (denoted by CSim@K) and (2) diversity- string contains the
requirements. Due to the limited weighted accuracy (denoted by DPass@K).
computational resources, we randomly sampled 50 ′ by examining the We
first construct the set CK problems for each dataset. functional
correctness of each code in CK , i.e., ′ = {c\|I\[c → Pass\], c ∈ C }.
Then, similar Models We include several recent competitive CK K LM
families in our experimental setup to differen- to Sim@K, we define
CSim@K by the inter-code ′ as follows: tiate their behavior in terms of
code diversity. similarity for the code set CK • CodeLlama (Rozière et
al., 2024) is one of the CSim@K = E ′ sim(ck , ck′ ). (2) most prominent
code LM families. Especially, ck ,ck′ ∼CK we employ a variant, i.e.,
CodeLlama-P, that is Note that this score is designed to measure the
specifically finetuned for Python. To observe the diversity of the codes
conditioned on functional effect on model size, both 7B and 13B models
correctness. Moreover, to examine how well code are adopted in our
experiments. LMs can generate correct implementations in di- •
StarCoder2 (Lozhkov et al., 2024) is another verse ways, we define the
diversity-weighted cor- open-sourced code LM powered by the big-code
rectness metric by organizations. They initially show remarkable DPass@K
= Pass@1 · (1 − CSim@K). (3) performance in code generation in terms of
func- tional correctness. Particularly, the DPass@K metric assigns the •
Deepseek-Coder (Guo et al., 2024) is a com- weight to the correct codes,
proportional to their petitive code LM family that outperforms other
diversity (i.e., 1 − CSim@K). We remark that all code LMs in recent code
generation bench- these metrics above are calculated for a given prob-
mark (Ben Allal et al., 2022). lem and then averaged over the dataset. •
GPT-3.5-turbo (Brown et al., 2020) is a well- 4 To avoid redundant
computations, we evaluate each code known proprietary LM powered by
OpenAI 5 . only once, rather than considering it for all possible pairs.
We 5 empirically found that there is no significant difference. The
version of the model used in this experiment is  Datasets
APPS-Introductory APPS-Interview Similarity measures SCC CodeBERT
LLM-Eval SCC CodeBERT LLM-Eval Temperature (τ ) 0.2 0.8 0.2 0.8 0.2 0.8
0.2 0.8 0.2 0.8 0.2 0.8 CodeLlama-P 7B 14.0 2.0 71.9 48.7 42.5 13.8 8.0
2.8 71.6 52.1 32.5 10.5 CodeLlama-I 7B 52.0 27.6 89.7 81.8 65.7 53.5
50.4 14.4 92.1 80.2 60.4 42.3 CodeLlama-P 13B 12.8 3.2 71.3 51.2 39.3
22.8 10.4 2.4 80.4 46.9 29.8 12.3 CodeLlama-I 13B 52.0 38.8 92.7 84.6
71.5 59.8 40.0 18.4 91.5 84.3 59.6 45.3 CodeLlama-P 34B 2.0 1.2 46.4
46.3 14.6 14.2 1.2 0.4 38.8 50.0 8.9 8.1 CodeLlama-I 34B 62.8 24.0 94.6
83.7 71.6 44.8 58.0 20.8 96.5 87.2 70.6 41.8 StarCoder2 15B 35.6 3.2
80.3 52.1 49.8 22.3 14.4 4.8 81.7 54.8 44.8 16.9 StarCoder2-I 15B 47.6
18.4 86.7 73.8 69.2 51.2 45.2 3.6 84.2 62.2 57.8 29.8 Deepseek-Coder
6.7B 24.4 2.4 74.9 57.6 42.3 21.7 14.4 2.4 70.2 52.7 27.8 9.5
Deepseek-Coder-I 6.7B 50.0 15.6 84.9 74.3 64.5 43.5 28.4 10.8 81.7 66.6
46.5 28.8 GPT-3.5-turbo 65.2 37.6 94.4 89.1 76.8 43.2 40.4 19.6 93.9
83.6 56.8 48.1 Datasets APPS-Competition HumanEval Similarity measures
SCC CodeBERT LLM-Eval SCC CodeBERT LLM-Eval Temperature (τ ) 0.2 0.8 0.2
0.8 0.2 0.8 0.2 0.8 0.2 0.8 0.2 0.8 CodeLlama-P 7B 5.6 1.6 71.2 43.8
28.3 7.2 80.5 12.7 97.1 94.0 75.0 31.8 CodeLlama-I 7B 28.8 6.8 91.0 76.4
50.1 31.5 97.7 61.4 99.9 98.0 96.0 72.5 CodeLlama-P 13B 9.6 1.6 79.6
45.1 21.5 9.1 85.8 15.2 98.7 94.3 81.8 48.9 CodeLlama-I 13B 30.8 12.8
90.8 83.8 56.8 32.1 97.7 65.4 99.4 98.1 93.8 82.3 CodeLlama-P 34B 12.0
0.8 70.8 44.6 27.8 6.5 47.2 9.2 95.3 81.7 74.1 42.8 CodeLlama-I 34B 48.4
17.6 93.3 85.1 62.5 33.5 81.6 61.2 99.0 98.1 91.8 72.6 StarCoder2 15B
6.4 2.0 75.6 50.2 32.6 11.5 77.5 7.7 96.5 93.4 76.5 42.3 StarCoder2-I
15B 33.6 2.4 80.4 55.5 48.3 25.5 81.3 34.1 99.9 95.5 85.3 65.8
Deepseek-Coder 6.7B 1.2 1.2 45.2 46.5 8.5 6.8 80.4 10.6 97.4 93.5 79.3
49.5 Deepseek-Coder-I 6.7B 31.6 7.2 81.5 64.8 41.5 23.8 95.5 34.1 99.9
96.5 84.3 63.5 GPT-3.5-turbo 31.6 12.0 91.3 83.2 49.6 40.1 70.8 61.2
97.2 95.3 81.2 77.3

Table 2: Similarity of codes (%) generated by various sizes of code LMs
based on three evaluation methods: SCC, CodeBERT, and LLM-Eval. For each
(dataset, metric) pair, the highest similarity scores are highlighted in
bold for those generated with a temperature of 0.2, and underlined for
those generated with a temperature of 0.8.

We also include this model as they show out- the similarity among the
generated codes decreases, standing performance in code generation
tasks. indicating that most LMs tend to produce more di- Whole
open-sourced model families have verse code as the coding problems
become hard. instruction-tuned models and we include them to As
challenging problems lead to uncertain token study how the instruction
tuning affects the code distributions, LMs produce varied reasoning
paths generation diversity. For each models, we generate and
implementations. For HumanEval dataset, they ten implementations per
problem with temperature show higher similarity score compared to APPS
scaling with varying temperatures, i.e., 0.2 and 0.8, dataset. We
speculate the reason for this experi- and nucleus sampling with top 0.95
probability mental results as HumanEval dataset consists of and generate
at most 512 tokens per generation. basic coding problems and code LMs
are likely to encounter similar form of coding examples during 4.2
Diversity of Generated Codes (RQ1) their pre-training stage. Table 2
reports the Sim@10 scores of various code LMs using four different
datasets. We highlight the Analysis on similarity measures Our results
key observations from the table as follows: also demonstrate that the
three code similarity measures capture diverse aspects between two
Comparison across different datasets We codes. For example, CodeLlama-P
13B produces clearly observe that the similarity of generated code more
similar codes than StarCoder2 15B on APPS- varies significantly
depending on the dataset. In Competition with SCC and CodeBERT measures,
particular, in APPS dataset, whole models exhibit but we obtain
different results with LLM-Eval mea- similar trends based on the
difficulty level of the sure. This implies that LLM-Eval properly
captures problems. As the problems become more difficult, the latent
proximity between the generated codes gpt-3.5-turbo-0125. through
reasoning, which is supported by the re- Figure 4: Similarity and
functional correctness of generated codes from base models (pentagons)
and Figure 5: Jointly evaluation of functional correctness
instruction-tuned models (stars) on HumanEval. and similarity score on
the HumanEval dataset.

sults in Section 4.5 as well. tended consequence of narrowing the
distribution of the implementation space, thereby hindering the
Comparison of instruction-tuned LMs with model's ability to generate
creative or diverse solu- their base LMs Instruction-tuned models
exhibit, tions for the given problems. on average, 26% higher similarity
scores compared To further consider the diversity among correct to their
base models across all datasets. We observe implementations, we examine
the generated imple- that this occurs because instruction-tuned models
mentations with our proposed metrics in Figure 5. consistently use the
same function and variable For all the models, CSim@10 scores are gener-
names, as well as maintain a consistent number of ally higher than
Sim@10 scores, indicating that the functions. Notably, CodeLlama shows
the largest correct codes roughly share similar mechanisms. score
difference, indicating that its ability to gener- On the other hand,
DPass@10 scores are signifi- ate diverse paths is significantly
constrained after cantly lower, due to the challenge of generating im-
instruction tuning. plementations that operate using different correct
mechanisms. Interestingly, increasing the tempera- 4.3 Relationship
between Diversity and ture to promote diverse implementations allows
Functional Correctness (RQ2) StarCoder2-I to achieve competitive
DPass@10 To further examine the characteristics of generated scores.
This indicates that while StarCoder2-I may codes, we study the
relationship between the di- be less likely to produce correct code on
its own, versity and functional correctness of the generated it can
generate a wider range of accurate solutions, codes. To this end, we
utilize the Pass@K score, suggesting its potential as a generator of
diverse which is widely used to measure functional correct- and accurate
code. ness. Pass@K score represents the proportion of solved problems
where each problem is regarded 4.4 Effect of Temperature and Prompting
as solved if, among K candidate implementations, Strategies (RQ3) at
least one implementation passes the whole test We evaluate how the
decoding and prompting case. strategies affect the diversity of
generated codes. We plot Pass@1, Pass@10, and Sim@10 scores Figure 6
represents Sim@10 and CSim@10 scores of various code LMs on HumanEval
dataset (Fig- with various temperatures. The scores for Hu- ure 4).
Overall, Pass@1 scores show a noticeable manEval dataset show high
CSim@10 scores as the increase as the model fine-tuned to follow
instruc- problems are easy to solve. In contrast, the APPS tions.
However, Pass@10 scores for the instruction- dataset contains more
challenging problems, result- tuned models do not increase as Pass@1
scores do. ing in the generation of more diverse code. When These
results imply that while instruction tuning in- considering functional
correctness, many similar creases the probability of generating correct
codes codes are filtered out, causing a tendency for the compared to
their base models, it also has the unin- CSim score to be lower.
However, all datasets  Datasets APPS-Introductory APPS-Interview Model
Pass@1 Sim@10 Pass@1 Sim@10 Vanilla 49.6 62.4 24.6 56.1 w/ Planning 34.9
77.5 7.1 66.5 w/ Few-shot CoT 57.4 79.8 45.2 67.8 Datasets
APPS-Competition HumanEval Model Pass@1 Sim@10 Pass@1 Sim@10 Vanilla 5.8
49.3 69.9 81.3 w/ Planning 3.5 60.5 61.2 82.5 w/ Few-shot CoT 37.3 52.8
82.4 81.5

                                                           Table 3: Effect of prompting strategies to enhance LM’s
                                                           reasoning ability in code generation tasks. GPT-3.5-
                                                           turbo is used as the target code LM with τ = 0.2.

Figure 6: Code similarity changes of CodeLlama-I 13B Measures SCC
CodeBERT LLM-Eval with respect to the temperature SCC - 41.4 57.9
CodeBERT 41.4 - 49.5 LLM-Eval 57.9 49.5 - showed a tendency for Sim@K
and CSim@K to Human 54.5 51.8 76.8 decrease as the temperature
increased, meaning the generated solution became diverse. This finding
is Table 4: The Pearson correlation between pairwise code compatible
with the previous ones in several recent similarity scores from human
evaluators and the scores works (Chen et al., 2021). from SCC, CodeBERT,
and LLM-Eval. LLM-Eval ex- We also examine the effect of few-shot
Chain-of- hibits the highest correlation with human annotators. Thought
(CoT) prompting (Kojima et al., 2022) and another advanced prompting
strategy used in Al- phacodium (Ridnik et al., 2024) that enhances the
are provided, so the scoring criteria rely solely on code generation
process through its Planning step. the judgment of the human evaluators.
Table 4 To construct few-shot examples for CoT prompt- summarizes the
Pearson correlation between pair- ing, we randomly select one problem
from each wise code similarity measures and human evalua- difficulty
level in the Apps dataset, resulting in a to- tion, based on 100
randomly sampled code pairs tal of three examples for prompting. The
planning spanning a diverse range. Our findings indicate process
involves the GPT-3.5 turbo model gener- that reasoning-based similarity
(i.e., LLM-Eval) ex- ating an explanation and solution for the problem,
hibits the strongest correlation with human evalua- and then creating
candidate codes based on this. tors' assessments, with its correlation
coefficient up Among these candidate codes, the one most similar to 25%
higher than others. In contrast, embedding- to the generated solution is
used in the GPT prompt. based similarity (i.e., CodeBERT) exhibits no
sig- In Table 3, applying these prompt strategies leads nificant
correlation with human evaluation (approx- to an increase in the Sim@10
score, as the gener- imately 50%). These results strongly suggest that
ated codes tend to have a more consistent structure, the proposed
detailed instructions for LLM prompt- even if they are not functionally
correct. Note that ing can serve as effective guidelines for evaluating
the planning process decreases Pass@1 compared pairwise code similarity
with a deep understanding to the vanilla approach, because the
performance of the coding domain. of GPT-3.5-turbo is not enough to
generate proper 5 Conclusion explanations or solutions. The full prompt
for plan- ning is in Appendix A.2 In this paper, we explore the code
generation ability of LMs by simultaneously evaluating both inter- 4.5
Correlation of Human and Automatic code similarity (i.e., diversity) and
functional cor- Evaluation on Pairwise Code Similarity rectness. To
achieve this, we propose an evaluation We recruit 15 graduate students
majoring in com- framework that integrates diverse pairwise code puter
science and ask them to evaluate the similar- similarity measures and
comprehensive metrics to ity between given code pairs by using their
domain assess the quality of K sampled codes. Specifically, knowledge.
No detailed instructions or guidelines drawing from software engineering
principles, we introduce a reasoning-based similarity measure for
References code pairs, which exhibits the highest correlation Jacob
Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten with human evaluators
compared to other metrics. Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen
Through extensive experiments, we have shown Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael
Terry, Quoc Le, and that the diversity of generated code varies depend-
Charles Sutton. 2021. Program synthesis with large ing on factors such
as model sizes, temperatures, language models. training methods,
prompting strategies, and prob- Loubna Ben Allal, Niklas Muennighoff,
Logesh lem complexities. However, most existing code Kumar Umapathi, Ben
Lipkin, and Leandro LMs tend to produce functionally correct codes that
von Werra. 2022. A framework for the eval- are also similar to each
other. These observations uation of code generation models. https:
//github.com/bigcode-project/ highlight the necessity for further
research aimed bigcode-evaluation-harness. at enhancing code LMs to
generate more diverse and correct code using a variety of approaches.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan,
Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Limitations Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish
Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot Despite
our solid evaluation framework and con- learners. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 33:1877--1901. sistent findings, we
identify several limitations in our work and list promising research
directions for Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen El-
facilitating research about code diversity. First, our dan, Johannes
Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar, analysis does not cover large-scale
code LMs due Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lund- berg, et
al. 2023. Sparks of artificial general intelli- to insufficient
computational resources. As evalu- gence: Early experiments with gpt-4.
arXiv preprint ating extremely large models such as CodeLlama
arXiv:2303.12712. 70B requires expensive computational resources,
devising an efficient evaluation framework could Mark Chen, Jerry
Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming be a promising future work to enable
investigating Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Ka- plan,
Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, the behavior of large-scale
code LMs and provide Greg Brockman, et al. 2021. Evaluating large
valuable insights to the model developers. Addi- language models trained
on code. arXiv preprint tionally, we randomly sample fifty problems from
arXiv:2107.03374. APPS dataset due to the expensive cost of GPT-4. Wenhu
Chen, Xueguang Ma, Xinyi Wang, and Although our human experiment shows
that LLM- William W Cohen. 2022. Program of thoughts Eval is highly
correlated with humans even with prompting: Disentangling computation
from reason- small samples, scaling up this evaluation into whole ing
for numerical reasoning tasks. arXiv preprint examples could be useful
to some extent. Lastly, arXiv:2211.12588. we inevitably adopt a handful
of code similarity Shihan Dou, Junjie Shan, Haoxiang Jia, Wenhao Deng,
measures in our experiments even though we ex- Zhiheng Xi, Wei He,
Yueming Wu, Tao Gui, Yang tensively search the existing literature about
code Liu, and Xuanjing Huang. 2023. Towards under- similarity measures.
Therefore, developing a code standing the capability of large language
models similarity measure that captures different aspects on code clone
detection: a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01191. between codes
could be useful and synergize with our proposed framework. Zhangyin
Feng, Daya Guo, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, Xi- aocheng Feng, Ming Gong, Linjun
Shou, Bing Qin, Ethical Consideration Ting Liu, Daxin Jiang, and Ming
Zhou. 2020. Code- BERT: A pre-trained model for programming and In our
research, we have exclusively utilized open- natural languages. In
Findings of the Association source language models (LMs) and datasets.
This for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pages 1536--1547,
Online. Association for Computational ensures transparency and allows
the broader re- Linguistics. search community to replicate and build
upon our work without legal or proprietary constraints. Also, Daya Guo,
Qihao Zhu, Dejian Yang, Zhenda Xie, Kai we recruited graduate students
in computer science Dong, Wentao Zhang, Guanting Chen, Xiao Bi, Y. Wu,
Y. K. Li, Fuli Luo, Yingfei Xiong, and Wen- to evaluate code similarity,
ensuring their involve- feng Liang. 2024. Deepseek-coder: When the large
ment was voluntary and informed. We do not in- language model meets
programming -- the rise of tend harm or overlook significant ethical
issues. code intelligence. William Harding and Matthew Kloster. 2024.
Coding Dmitry Abulkhanov, Indraneil Paul, Zhuang Li, Wen- on copilot:
2023 data suggests downward pressure on Ding Li, Megan Risdal, Jia Li,
Jian Zhu, Terry Yue code quality. https://www.gitclear.com/ Zhuo,
Evgenii Zheltonozhskii, Nii Osae Osae Dade,
coding_on_copilot_data_shows_ais\_ Wenhao Yu, Lucas Krauß, Naman Jain,
Yixuan Su, downward_pressure_on_code_quality. Xuanli He, Manan Dey,
Edoardo Abati, Yekun Chai, Niklas Muennighoff, Xiangru Tang, Muhtasham
Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Saurav Kadavath, Man- Oblokulov,
Christopher Akiki, Marc Marone, Cheng- tas Mazeika, Akul Arora, Ethan
Guo, Collin Burns, hao Mou, Mayank Mishra, Alex Gu, Binyuan Hui, Samir
Puranik, Horace He, Dawn Song, and Jacob Tri Dao, Armel Zebaze, Olivier
Dehaene, Nicolas Steinhardt. 2021. Measuring coding challenge com-
Patry, Canwen Xu, Julian McAuley, Han Hu, Torsten petence with APPS. In
Thirty-fifth Conference on Scholak, Sebastien Paquet, Jennifer Robinson,
Car- Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and olyn Jane
Anderson, Nicolas Chapados, Mostofa Pat- Benchmarks Track (Round 2).
wary, Nima Tajbakhsh, Yacine Jernite, Carlos Muñoz Ferrandis, Lingming
Zhang, Sean Hughes, Thomas Namgyu Ho, Laura Schmid, and Se-Young Yun.
2022. Wolf, Arjun Guha, Leandro von Werra, and Harm Large language
models are reasoning teachers. arXiv de Vries. 2024. Starcoder 2 and the
stack v2: The preprint arXiv:2212.10071. next generation. Hamel Husain,
Ho-Hsiang Wu, Tiferet Gazit, Miltiadis Allamanis, and Marc Brockschmidt.
2019. Code- Shuai Lu, Daya Guo, Shuo Ren, Junjie Huang, Alexey SearchNet
challenge: Evaluating the state of seman- Svyatkovskiy, Ambrosio Blanco,
Colin Clement, tic code search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.09436. Dawn
Drain, Daxin Jiang, Duyu Tang, Ge Li, Lidong Zhou, Linjun Shou, Long
Zhou, Michele Tufano, Seungone Kim, Se June Joo, Doyoung Kim, Joel Jang,
Ming Gong, Ming Zhou, Nan Duan, Neel Sundare- Seonghyeon Ye, Jamin Shin,
and Minjoon Seo. 2023. san, Shao Kun Deng, Shengyu Fu, and Shujie Liu.
The cot collection: Improving zero-shot and few-shot 2021. Codexglue: A
machine learning benchmark learning of language models via
chain-of-thought dataset for code understanding and generation.
fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14045. Daniel Perez and Shigeru
Chiba. 2019. Cross-language Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel
Reid, Yu- clone detection by learning over abstract syntax trees. taka
Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. 2022. Large lan- In 2019 IEEE/ACM 16th
International Conference guage models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances
in on Mining Software Repositories (MSR), pages 518-- neural information
processing systems, 35:22199-- 528. 22213. Nils Reimers and Iryna
Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-bert: Andrew K Lampinen, Ishita Dasgupta,
Stephanie CY Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks. Chan, Kory
Matthewson, Michael Henry Tessler, In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
on Empirical Antonia Creswell, James L McClelland, Jane X Methods in
Natural Language Processing. Associa- Wang, and Felix Hill. 2022. Can
language models tion for Computational Linguistics. learn from
explanations in context? arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02329. Tal Ridnik,
Dedy Kredo, and Itamar Friedman. 2024. Code generation with alphacodium:
From prompt Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas
engineering to flow engineering. arXiv preprint Muennighoff, Denis
Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou, Marc arXiv:2401.08500. Marone, Christopher
Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny Chim, et al. 2023. Starcoder: may the source be
with you! arXiv Chanchal Kumar Roy and James R Cordy. 2007. A preprint
arXiv:2305.06161. survey on software clone detection research. Queen's
Jiawei Liu, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuyao Wang, and School of computing TR,
541(115):64--68. LINGMING ZHANG. 2023a. Is your code gener- ated by
chatgpt really correct? rigorous evaluation Baptiste Roziere, Jonas
Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten of large language models for code
generation. In Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi Adi, Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez, Jérémy
Rapin, et al. 2023. volume 36, pages 21558--21572. Curran Associates,
Code llama: Open foundation models for code. arXiv Inc. preprint
arXiv:2308.12950.

Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Baptiste Rozière, Jonas
Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. 2023b.
Gpte- Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi Adi, val: Nlg
evaluation using gpt-4 with better human Jingyu Liu, Romain Sauvestre,
Tal Remez, Jérémy alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16634. Rapin,
Artyom Kozhevnikov, Ivan Evtimov, Joanna Bitton, Manish Bhatt, Cristian
Canton Ferrer, Aaron Anton Lozhkov, Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Fed-
Grattafiori, Wenhan Xiong, Alexandre Défossez, erico Cassano, Joel
Lamy-Poirier, Nouamane Tazi, Jade Copet, Faisal Azhar, Hugo Touvron,
Louis Mar- Ao Tang, Dmytro Pykhtar, Jiawei Liu, Yuxiang Wei, tin,
Nicolas Usunier, Thomas Scialom, and Gabriel Tianyang Liu, Max Tian,
Denis Kocetkov, Arthur Synnaeve. 2024. Code llama: Open foundation mod-
Zucker, Younes Belkada, Zijian Wang, Qian Liu, els for code. Hitesh
Sajnani, Vaibhav Saini, Jeffrey Svajlenko, Chan- A.2 Planning strategy
chal K. Roy, and Cristina V. Lopes. 2016. Sourcer- ercc: Scaling code
clone detection to big-code. In To display prompt strategy's effect on
Sim@10, 2016 IEEE/ACM 38th International Conference on we utilize a part
of AlphaCodium 's (Ridnik et al., Software Engineering (ICSE), pages
1157--1168. 2024) framework, self-reflecting, generating pos- sible
solutions, and choosing the best solutions. Shiqi Wang, Zheng Li,
Haifeng Qian, Chenghao Yang, In self-reflecting (Table 6) LLM
understands the Zijian Wang, Mingyue Shang, Varun Kumar, Sam- son Tan,
Baishakhi Ray, Parminder Bhatia, Ramesh given description and generates
the commentary Nallapati, Murali Krishna Ramanathan, Dan Roth, and
explanations in bullet points. In Table 7 based and Bing Xiang. 2023.
ReCode: Robustness eval- on the self-reflection and explanation of the
previ- uation of code generation models. In Proceedings ous stage, LLM
generates possible solutions to the of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
problem. In the final stage(Table 8, the LLM selects pages 13818--13843,
Toronto, Canada. Association the best solution from the possible
solutions by con- for Computational Linguistics. sidering the problem
and self-reflection. This final solution is the role of guidelines to
generate appro- Yejie Wang, Keqing He, Guanting Dong, Pei Wang, Wei-
priate code for the problem. To ensure consistency, hao Zeng, Muxi Diao,
Yutao Mou, Mengdi Zhang, Jingang Wang, Xunliang Cai, et al. 2024. Dolph-
the decoding temperature is set to 0.2 at every step. coder:
Echo-locating code large language models with diverse and
multi-objective instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09136.

Zhiruo Wang, Grace Cuenca, Shuyan Zhou, Frank F Xu, and Graham Neubig.
2022. Mconala: a benchmark for code generation from multiple natural
languages. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.08388.

Morteza Zakeri-Nasrabadi and Saeed Parsa. 2022. An ensemble
meta-estimator to predict source code testa- bility. Appl. Soft Comput.,
129(C).

Morteza Zakeri-Nasrabadi, Saeed Parsa, Mohammad Ramezani, Chanchal Roy,
and Masoud Ekhtiarzadeh. 2023. A systematic literature review on source
code similarity measurement and clone detection: Tech- niques,
applications, and challenges. Journal of Sys- tems and Software, page
111796.

Zibin Zheng, Kaiwen Ning, Yanlin Wang, Jingwen Zhang, Dewu Zheng, Mingxi
Ye, and Jiachi Chen. 2023. A survey of large language models for code:
Evolution, benchmarking, and future trends. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.10372.

Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi
Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, et
al. 2022. Least-to-most prompting enables complex reason- ing in large
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10625.

A Prompt Details A.1 LLM-Eval For evaluating the similarity score by
LLM-Eval using GPT-4, we adapt the G-Eval framework (Liu et al., 2023b).
The descriptions for each score are defined according to the hierarchy
we established. Full details in Table5 Simiarity measurement prompt of
LLM-Eval \[Task Description\] You will be given two codes written for a
same problem. Your task is to rate the similarity between two codes.
Please make sure you read and understand these instructions carefully.
Please keep these codes open while reviewing, and refer to it as needed.
The output (score) should be integer.

Evaluation Criteria: Plagiarism (1-5) - the collective quality of code
similarity.

\[Evaluation Steps\] 1. Read the two codes carefully and identify the
main flow. 2. Compare between two codes. Check the similarity of these
two codes. 3. Assign a score for plagiarism on a scale of 1 to 5.

\[Simiarity scores\] 5: Two codes are an exact copy code. It is copied
line by line, with the code structure, logic, algorithms, comments,
whitespaces, and all other elements being identical. 4: Minor trivial
modifications have been made. Changes may include variable names,
literal values, comments, etc., but the overall code structure, logic,
and algorithms remain the same. 3: While the core logic and algorithms
are preserved, there are some simple control or data flow changes. For
example, the type of loop (for, while, etc.) may have been changed, or
the order of conditional statements may have been altered. However, the
overall code meaning remain similar. 2: The core algorithm is
maintained, but it has been substantially modified to the extent that it
has low flow and logic similarity. Detailed elements such as comments
have been extensively modified, and some code blocks may have been
rearranged or removed. 1: It is an entirely different, where the logic
have been completely changed with no similarity. Two code differ in all
aspects, including code structure, control flow, and data representation
methods even if both codes are solving the same problem.

Evaluation Form (scores ONLY): - Plagiarism score:

                   Table 5: The similarity measurement prompt for using LLM-Eval.

Generating self reflection and test explanations \[Task Description\]
"""You are given a code problem:

# problem description:

# {description}

Given the code problem, you have two tasks: 1. Reflect on the problem,
and describe it in your own words, in bullet points. Pay attention to
small details, nuances, notes and examples in the problem description.
2. Explain how each provided example input leads to the corresponding
output (in total \[actual-number-of-tests\] examples are provided). Read
carefully the problem description. Make sure the test explanations are
consistent with them, and between themselves. The explanation must
coherently and logically lead from the input to the output. Be as
specific as possible. The output must be a YAML object equivalent to
type ProblemReflection, according to the following Pydantic definitions:
===== Class InputOutput(BaseModel): input: str output: str explanation:
str = Field(description="Short explanation how the test input leads to
the test output.")

class ProblemReflection(BaseModel): self-reflection: str =
Field(description="Describe the problem in your own words, in bullet
points. Address the problem goals, inputs, outputs, rules, constraints,
and other relevant details.") tests-explanations: list\[InputOutput\] =
Field(max-items= actual-number-of-tests , description="List of explana-
tions for each test case") =====

Example YAML output: "'yaml self-reflection: -\| ... -\| ...
tests-explanations: - input: \| ... output: \| .. explanation: \| ...
... "'

Answer: "'yaml"""

            Table 6: The self reflection and test explanation prompt for planning strategy

Generating posssible solutions about code problem \[Task Description\]
""" Pay attention to small details and nuances in the problem
description. """ user="""You are given a code problem, and a
self-reflection on the problem:

      problem description:
      =====
      {description}
      =====


      self-reflection on the problem:
      ============
      {self-reflection}
      ============



      Your goal is to come up with possible solutions to the code problem.

      Guidelines:
      - Make sure each solution fully addresses the problem goals, constraints, examples, and notes.
      - Each solution must have reasonable runtime and memory complexity - less than three seconds on a modern
      computer, given the problem constraints for large inputs.
      - Double-check the solutions. Each possible solution must be able to generalize to additional test cases, not just
      the ones provided in the problem description.

      The output must be a YAML object equivalent to type ProblemSolutions, according to the following Pydantic
      definitions:
      ======
      class Solution(BaseModel):
      name: str = Field(description="The name of the solution")
      content: str = Field(description="A description of the solution")
      why-it-works: str = Field(description="Shortly explain why this solution correctly solves the problem. Be
      specific and detailed regarding the problem rules and goals.")
      labels: List[str] = Field(description="A list of labels for the solution. For example (partial list): binary search,
      dynamic programming, trees, combinatorics, dfs, bfs, graphs, greedy, math, data structures, geometry, number
      theory, two pointers, simulation, direct approach, probabilities, ...")
      complexity: str = Field(description="The complexity of the solution")

      class ProblemSolutions(BaseModel):
      possible-solutions: List[Solution] = Field(max-items=[max-num-of-possible-solutions], description="A list of
      possible solutions to the problem. Make sure each solution fully addresses the problem rules and goals.")
      ======

      Example YAML output:
      “‘yaml
      possible-solutions:
      - name: |
      ...
      content: |
      ...
      why-it-works: |
      ...
      labels:
      - ...
      - ...
      complexity: |
      ...
      “‘

      Answer:
      “‘yaml
       """

Table 7: Based on previous output, self-reflection, prompt for
generating possible solutions about the problem description and
self-reflection.  Choosing the best solutions among the candidates
\[Task Description\] """ You are given a code problem and a
self-reflection on the problem:

       problem description:
       {description}

       self-reflection on the problem:
       {self-reflection}

       Here is a list of s-possible-solutions|length possible solutions to the problem:
       {s-possible-solutions-str}

       Using the inputs above, your goal is to choose the best solution to the code problem.
       Don’t just pick the most efficient solution. The main consideration is that the solution can fully solve the problem
       in a simple and robust manner.
       Make sure the chosen solution has a reasonable runtime - less than three seconds on a modern computer, given
       the problem constraints regarding large inputs.

       The output must be a YAML object equivalent to type ProblemSolution, according to the following Pydantic
       definitions:
       =======
       class Test(BaseModel):
       input: str
       output: str

       class ProblemSolution(BaseModel):
       name: str = Field(description="The name of the best solution") content: str = Field(description="The content of
       the best solution")
       why: str = Field(description="Shortly explain why is this the best solution")
       flow: List[str] = Field(description="Describe of the flow of the solution, in bullet points")
       problem-tests: List[Test] = Field("List the input-output examples that are provided in the problem description.")
       input-output-examples-flow: List[str] = Field(description="Describe, in bullet points, how the proposed flow
       will lead to getting the expected output for the provided input examples")
       =======
       Example YAML output:
       “‘yaml
       name: |
       ...
       content: |
       ...
       why: |
       ...
       flow:
       -|
       ...
       -|
       ...
       ...
       problem-tests:
       - input: |
       ...
       output: |
       ...
       input-output-examples-flow:
       -|
       ...
       -|
       ...
       “‘

       Each YAML output MUST be after a newline, indented, with block scalar indicator (’|’).

       Answer:
       “‘yaml
       """

Table 8: Based on previous solutions, prompt for choosing the best about
the problem description and self-reflection. 
