                                          Comparing Human and LLM Generated Code: The
                                                        Jury is Still Out!
                                                Sherlock A. Licorish                       Ansh Bajpai                                      Chetan Arora
                                                 School of Computing            Faculty of Information Technology         Department of Software Systems & Cybersecurity
                                                  University Of Otago                   Monash University                               Monash University
                                                     New Zealand                             Australia                                       Australia
                                             sherlock.licorish@otago.ac.nz          anshbajpai8@gmail.com                           chetan.arora@monash.edu

                                                           Fanyu Wang                                                    Kla Tantithamthavorn
                                         Department of Software Systems & Cybersecurity                      Department of Software Systems & Cybersecurity

arXiv:2501.16857v1 \[cs.SE\] 28 Jan 2025

                                                       Monash University                                                   Monash University
                                                          New Zealand                                                           Australia
                                                    fanyu.wang@monash.edu                                                chakkrit@monash.edu



                                            Abstract—Much is promised in relation to AI-supported             disruptive trend that is set to revolutionise software devel-
                                         software development. However, there has been limited                opment [21]. These models promise to speed up software
                                         evaluation effort in the research domain aimed at validating         development time, minimise human error, and improve cod-
                                         the true utility of such techniques, especially when compared to
                                         human coding outputs. We bridge this gap, where a benchmark          ing efficiency [22]. However, with increasing use of these
                                         dataset comprising 72 distinct software engineering tasks is used    technologies, it becomes critical to systematically assess their
                                         to compare the effectiveness of large language models (LLMs)         efficacy and safety, particularly in comparison with human
                                         and human programmers in producing Python software code.             programmers [1]. The idea is that if LLMs are able to
                                         GPT-4 is used as a representative LLM, where for the code            match humans, they may be used to at least support them
                                         generated by humans and this LLM, we evaluate code quality
                                         and adherence to Python coding standards, code security and          during the software development process. The fact is, even
                                         vulnerabilities, code complexity and functional correctness. We      though previous work have made attempts to evaluate the
                                         use various static analysis benchmarks, including Pylint, Radon,     fine-tuning or pretraining performance of LLMs [26], [27],
                                         Bandit and test cases. Among the notable outcomes, results           their results do not conclusively support incorporating AI into
                                         show that human-generated code recorded higher ratings for           software development. The limitations could be formulated
                                         adhering to coding standards than GPT-4. We observe security
                                         flaws in code generated by both humans and GPT-4, however,           as following two viewpoints: (i) from a practical perspective,
                                         code generated by humans shows a greater variety of problems,        prompt generation needs further consideration while research
                                         but GPT-4 code included more severe outliers. Our results show       largely covers fine-tuning or pretraining results; (ii) there is
                                         that although GPT-4 is capable of producing coding solutions,        need to evaluate the alignment between human- and LLMs-
                                         it frequently produces more complex code that may need more          generated codes to verify how LLMs will support humans
                                         reworking to ensure maintainability. On the contrary however,
                                         our outcomes show that a higher number of test cases passed          during software development.
                                         for code generated by GPT-4 across a range of tasks than code           Thus, in order to provide comprehensive guidelines for sup-
                                         that was generated by humans. That said, GPT-4 frequently            porting software development through LLMs code generation,
                                         struggles with complex problem-solving that involve in-depth         especially for the participants involved in Python software
                                         domain knowledge. This study highlights the potential utility        development, we conduct a systematic quality evaluation of
                                         of LLMs for supporting software development, however, tasks
                                         requiring comprehensive, innovative or unconventional solutions,     code created by humans versus that generated by LLMs. Un-
                                         and careful debugging and error correction seem to be better         like previous work evaluating the alignment between human-
                                         developed by human programmers. We plot an agenda for the            and LLM-generated code by conducting human interviews
                                         software engineering community.                                      or exploring a single quality dimension, our study explores
                                                                                                              multiple quality dimensions. Specifically, inspired by previous
                                           Index Terms—Large Language Models, LLMs, Generative
                                         AI, Python Code Generation, Code Quality, Empirical Software
                                                                                                              assessments of code health and wholesomeness [23], we
                                         Engineering                                                          design our evaluation to cover: the mitigation of security
                                                                                                              risks, coding standards compliance, code complexity, and
                                                                                                              functional correctness, essential code quality dimensions [2]–
                                                               I. I NTRODUCTION
                                                                                                              [4]. Moreover, to provide detailed results, we examine 72
                                           The incorporation of artificial intelligence (AI) into software    different Python code-generated files, each representing a
                                         development, notably through large language models (LLMs)            different software engineering task.
                                         such as GPT-4, Gemini, LLaMA, Claude and Mistral, is a                  The evaluation dimensions are quantitatively investigated

in this study, with subsequent follow up deeper contextual code, how
they perform compared to human-generated code, examination. Security,
which is one of the primary quality and the security and ethical
implications of LLMs' involve- factors, remains a significant concern
during software develop- ment in code generation. ment \[24\]. That
said, LLMs, by definition, generate code based The capacity of LLMs to
produce text that resembles that on patterns learned from large
datasets, which often contain of a human has significantly increased
recently, opening up coding flaws \[6\], \[7\]. This paper carefully
examines the applications for the technology beyond basic text
generation security implications of code generated by LLMs, identifying
to encompass complex jobs like developing code. Code devel- typical
security flaws and comparing these flaws to those found opment
productivity can be increased and error rates can be in human-written
code, including cross-site scripting (XSS), decreased by automating
typical programming operations, as and other vulnerabilities. In
addition to security flaws, this demonstrated by the development of
models such as Gemini, study examines coding standards using linting
(static analysis) Claude, and GPT-4 \[1\], \[2\]. These models make use
of huge tools \[25\]. Linting tools facilitate the examination of code
for amounts of data to carry out a variety of functions and have
potential flaws and bad practices, helping to uncover variations been
shown to be capable of understanding and generating in coding standards
adherence and flagging sub-optimal prac- code snippets, offering
contextual recommendations, and au- tices that may lead to future
errors. Comparing the outcomes tomating debugging procedures \[3\]. from
human- and LLM-generated code, we assess LLMs' That said, the quality of
code generated by LLMs (like readiness and reliability for software
development \[8\], \[9\]. As humans) is paramount, with studies
emphasizing the need for the functional correctness assessment,
human-written and for robust metrics to evaluate aspects such as
maintainability, LLM-generated coding outcomes are tested using the same
readability, and performance \[7\], \[17\]. Tools like Radon and unit
test cases. This testing allows a direct comparison of Pylint have been
instrumental in quantifying these metrics, how effectively each codebase
completes the intended tasks, providing valuable insights into the
structural quality of code. providing deeper insight into their
functional performance and For example, Radon measures cyclomatic
complexity, offering reliability \[23\]. Code complexity is the last
factor considered. a way to understand code complexity, while Pylint
evalu- Using the cyclomatic complexity metric, we count the number ates
adherence to coding standards and identifies potential of linearly
independent pathways across source code \[23\]. This errors \[4\],
\[5\]. These tools play a crucial role in ensuring metric helps
determine the testability and maintainability of that LLM-generated code
meets high standards of quality and software. A comparison of cyclomatic
complexity between maintainability. In addition, specialized tools and
approaches human- and LLMs-generated code provides an understanding have
been developed to enhance code evaluation. Ren et al. of how the usage
of LLMs may affect the overall complexity \[35\] introduced CodeBLEU, an
automated evaluation tool of software and future maintenance efforts.
for code synthesis, which adapts evaluation metrics from the The
consideration of the aforementioned comprehensive NLP domain to assess
code generation. Similarly, Nguyen factors enables insightful analysis
of the human-LLMs align- et al. \[36\] evaluated the readability and
understandability of ment of code generation. Generally, the
contributions provided code generated by Copilot on test problems from
LeetCode. by this study are twofold: (i) under real workflow scenarios
in Recently, there has been a growing interest in assessing software
development, we conduct a comprehensive evaluation code quality from
practical or human-centric perspectives. For of the results of human-
and LLMs-generated codes, which example, EvalPlus is a comprehensive
empirical method for shows the gaps and limitations in current code
generation evaluating code quality \[33\], considering multiple factors
such methods; (ii) we provide recommendations for how the soft- as
functional correctness, test adequacy, code coverage, mutant ware
engineering community may incorporate AI into software kill rates,
empirical LLM sample failures, error detection, development, which
serves as guidelines for improving pro- and ranking adjustments. Wang et
al. \[34\] conducted an ductivity and software outcomes. experimental
evaluation of two software engineering tasks: This paper is organised as
follows. Section II provides code puzzles and typical software
development challenges. the study background and reviews related work.
Section III By involving human participants however, our study incorpo-
introduces our study settings, including our data and methods, rated a
human-centric dimension to evaluate the helpfulness measures and tools,
and data analysis. Section IV reports our of LLM-generated code in
real-world software engineering results, where we analyse the outcomes.
Section V summarises workflows, thereby emphasizing practical usability
alongside the implications of our findings, and Section VI considers
technical quality. threats to the study. We provide concluding remarks
in Section Security, in particular, is still a major concern for human-
VII, before outlining future work in Section VIII. and LLM-generated
code. It is vital to concentrate on creating methods for vulnerability
evaluation and mitigation because II. BACKGROUND LLMs have the power to
spread unsafe coding practices if they Significant changes have been
sparked by the integration are trained on data with coding
vulnerabilities. Because LLMs of Large Language Models (LLMs) into
software develop- are increasingly being used in software development
\[21\], ment, especially with regard to the automation of coding \[22\],
\[26\], \[27\], static analysis techniques like Bandit are procedures
\[21\], \[22\], \[40\]. This literature review examines a essential for
finding common security issues \[6\]. Research number of LLM
capabilities, including how well they generate has demonstrated that
LLMs may unintentionally introduce security flaws such as hardcoded
secrets and inappropriate enables objective evaluations. Radon \[5\],
Pylint, and Bandit handling of private information, underscoring the
necessity of \[6\] were used for code evaluation, as they have been
widely implementing strong security mechanisms \[7\]. acknowledged and
verified for their efficacy and reliability \[4\], Notwithstanding
potential biases \[8\] and practical chal- \[15\], \[17\]. lenges \[9\],
including stereotypes around gender \[29\] and The study uses a
benchmark dataset of 72 Python coding culture \[28\] that LLMs may
enforce, investigations explor- tasks, covering a variety of software
engineering problems ing and comparing human- and LLM-generated code
would sourced from a previous study \[7\]. A fourth year computing
provide insights into how well LLMs perform in comparison student with
software development experience (human pro- to human programmers.
However, such studies remain scarce, grammer) developed the code for the
72 coding tasks, while with most research focusing on how humans utilize
LLMs code samples were created using GPT-4 (i.e., the version avail-
during coding \[30\], \[31\] or on the accuracy of LLMs in able in April
2024) in order to produce equivalent LLM output. solving specific
programming tasks \[26\], \[27\]. There are a The full list of tasks and
associated solutions are available on few exceptions, for example,
Prather et al. \[37\] performed a request. We used zero-shot prompting
to guarantee that every contrastive study between human- and
LLM-generated code prompt was consistent and fair for comparison \[10\].
While it is using human interviews. In this study, participants were
pre- possible to repeatedly iterate prompting (i.e., using few-shots
sented with pairs of code samples and asked to answer ques- and
chain-of-thought prompting techniques) in an effort to tions regarding
understandability, preferences, advantages, and engineer improvements in
solutions generated by LLMs \[39\], concerns. However, this approach
relies heavily on subjective we believe such experimental configurations
would not fairly human evaluations and lacks rigorous comparison
results. support comparisons as planned in the work (i.e., human- In
contrast, Awal et al. \[38\] designed an experimental eval- generated
solutions were not evolved after repeated evalu- uation to compare
human-written code with code generated ations). Test files were created
for the human- and LLM- by BERT and CodeGPT. This study primarily
examined the generated code, where testing circumstances were consistent
security aspect by introducing an adversarial attack strategy to for the
72 tasks and evaluations were reliable and fair. evaluate code
robustness. Nonetheless, the study has notable Prompting: In developing
each prompt, contextual data was limitations: (i) a narrow focus on
evaluation factors, as security given in an effort to improve the LLM's
output/responses. is not the only aspect requiring consideration, and
(ii) the This contextual setup contained brief overviews of the task's
adoption of BERT and CodeGPT, which are not state-of-the- requirements,
expected outcomes, and any particular coding art (SOTA) LLMs for code
generation. While LLMs are good guidelines that had to be followed. An
example is shown at writing code for clearly described issues, they
frequently below. struggle with more difficult tasks that call for
detailed under- • Original Data Source standing or original
problem-solving techniques. For instance, Hochmair et al.'s \[12\] study
shows that while LLMs are effec- -- Taken from the original dataset
\[7\], a typical example tive at spatial reasoning tasks, they are less
successful in more task involves "creating a Python function to ap-
complex scenarios needing in-depth contextual knowledge. proximate the
sine function using a particular series That said, questions remain such
as: How do LLMs compare expansion". Our new dataset comprises the task,
to human programmers in terms of code security, quality and human- and
LLM-generated solutions. efficiency within software development tasks?,
In which areas • Prompting for LLM-Generated Code does LLM-generated
code exhibit weakness or underperfor- -- Prompt: "Write a Python
function that approximates mance when compared to human-written code,
particularly in the sine function using the Taylor series expansion.
terms of task execution, complexity management, and error Include error
handling for invalid inputs and docu- handling? ment the code with
comments explaining the logic." This work addresses this opportunity,
where detailed evalu- -- GPT-4 was charged with producing code based on
ations are conducted to compare human- and LLM-generated this prompt
using zero-shot prompting. The prompt code. was designed to guarantee
that the code generated would follow best standards for coding,
including III. S TUDY S ETTINGS error handling and documentation, in
addition to A. Data and Methods completing the task in question. One
LLM-generated In this study we use GPT-4 (OpenAI's GPT-4 that was
solution was saved for evaluation. available in the first two weeks of
April 2024) as a repre- • Test Cases sentative LLM for comparison
between LLM- and human- -- For the scenario (solution generated) above,
multiple generated Python code across various performance metrics. test
cases were designed to pass a set of angles to the This LLM was held to
be the best performing model at the function and check if the returned
values are within a time of our experiments. We use the quantitative
comparative reasonable margin of the true sine values, as follows.
analysis method for systematically comparing various mea- surable
characteristics of code produced by LLMs and human π π π 0, , ,
programmers \[18\], \[19\]. This design was chosen because it 6 4 2  --
To provide consistency in testing, the same test cases various
statistical procedures (e.g., box plots and formal were executed for
both human- and LLM-generated statistical testing). code. Tests were
created for all of the 72 tasks. • Detailed Issues: All the issues found
during the evaluation of each code file are manually explored by at
least B. Measures and Tools one author to complement the statistical
analysis and An automated Python script was employed to gather data
provide detailed context around the faults in human- and for this study.
It was created to execute and capture data for LLM-generated code. This
helps us investigate in detail 72 different Python code files, which
represented a variety of the kinds of mistakes that are common in human-
and software tasks. Industry-standard technologies such as Pylint
LLM-generated code, highlighting particular instances for code quality
evaluation, Radon for code complexity assess- in which LLMs perform
better/worse than human pro- ment, and Bandit for security analysis were
used in the eval- grammers \[32\]. Such deeper analysis also supports us
in uation process. Additionally, each code snippet's functional making
inferences and teasing out implications for future correctness was
tested using the Pytest package. The use of use of LLMs for code
generation. such an approach for studying code quality is established
\[25\]. IV. R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS We provide additional details on the
measures below. A. Code Compliance to Python Coding Standards • Pylint:
Used to assess/measure code quality and code As noted above, Pylint
checks Python code for mistakes and adherence or compliance to Python
coding standards. compliance with coding standards. Pylint was utilised
in our Code is given a rating by Pylint on a range of -10 to 10.
research to evaluate the documentation, coding conventions, Scores
nearing 10 signify exceptional compliance with and error detection
quality of Python code generated by Python coding guidelines \[20\] and
general code well- humans and LLMs. We discuss outcomes for these
dimensions being, whilst lower scores can suggest possible coding in
turn. violations or usage of inadequate practices. 1) Missing Docstrings
and Documentation Standards: • Radon: Employed for measuring code
complexity. With • Outcome: Outcomes revealed a notable lack of mod-
respect to cyclomatic complexity, Radon assigns grades ule and function
docstrings for code generated by both ranging from 'A' (most
maintainable) to 'F' (least main- humans and LLMs. For instance, for
complicated jobs tainable) and provides an average complexity score of
the like the tic-tac-toe GUI implementation and pandemic code in a float
format, which is utilised in our research. simulation, 85% of the GPT-4
outputs lacked complete Lower scores correspond to less maintainable and
more docstrings. Similarly, this problem was present in 78% complex
code. of human-written code. • Bandit: Utilized for static security
analysis to identify • Analysis: The lack of documentation in both
human- vs common vulnerabilities within code. Bandit reports prob-
LLM-generated code suggests there is need for improve- lems on three
tiers of severity: LOW, MEDIUM, and ment in both domains, especially for
code likely requiring HIGH. Additionally, we have aggregated the total
issues high maintainability and where new programmers may generated by a
coding solution (file) to represent the need to interface with the code.
codebase's overall security state, where a lower score 2) Coding
Standard Violations: denotes fewer vulnerabilities. • Outcome: Variable
and constant naming violations were • Pytest: Applied to execute the
written test cases, evaluat- observed on a large number of occasions (72
in GPT-4 ing the functionality and correctness of both human- and code
and 65 in human code), particularly in the applica- LLM-generated code.
Pytest results are typically binary, tion of scientific algorithms and
game logic. represented as PASS or FAIL for each test case. The •
Analysis: Violating naming conventions can cause con- percentage of
passed tests was also used to quantify the fusion for programmers and
slow down development. functional correctness or executability of the
code. Outcomes here indicate that although LLMs make more mistakes in
applying these standards than humans do, C. Data Analysis both humans
and LLMs struggle with adhering to naming To enable a thorough and
in-depth analysis of the per- conventions. formance differences between
human- and LLM-generated 3) Redefinition of Variables (Outer Scope):
code, two main kinds of result files were carefully generated. •
Outcome: It was observed that 45% of GPT-4 generated Under the same
evaluation criteria, these files are essential for code and 30% of human
code had incorrect redefinitions understanding the strengths and
weaknesses of both sources. from outer scope reported by Pylint,
especially in scripts A brief description of each is provided below:
with nested functions or complicated loops. • Statistics-based Metrics:
Metrics collected above offer a • Analysis: Redefinitions of this kind
may introduce risks measurable assessment of the performance of human-
and related to variable scope. Future LLM model training LLM-generated
code in terms of functional correctness, need to address this issue, in
enhancing contextual aware- code complexity, security vulnerabilities,
and compliance ness rate in LLM-generated code. That said, human to
coding standards. These metrics were analysed using generated code is
not perfect, and also needs vigilance.  4) Import and Structure Issues:
While LLMs are capable of producing syntactically accurate code, when
compared to human program- • Outcome: Results show that 55% of
GPT-4-generated mers, GPT-4 falls short of recommended practices files
had errors related to import ordering and missing at times and exhibits
variation in code quality and dependencies, particularly in files that
needed third-party context awareness when assessed with Pylint. The
libraries, such as bpy, for Blender tasks. In contrast, practical
effectiveness of LLM-generated code may such problems were present in
only 40% of the human be increased by improving training procedures,
generated code. such as combining a variety of coding patterns •
Analysis: Outcomes here illustrate the difficulty with and enforcing
stronger coding standards in training managing dependencies and
library-specific situations in data. code generated by LLMs, which could
be problematic in deployment circumstances where reliable and error- B.
Code Security and Vulnerabilities free execution is necessary. At the
same time, human Python code is parsed by Bandit to identify security
flaws generated code is not perfect, albeit better than code such as
insecure library usage, unsafe subprocess handling, created by LLMs.
hard coding of sensitive data, and other behaviours that increase code
vulnerabilities and lead to security breaches. As noted above, three
severity levels are distinguished by the tool: low, medium, and high. To
enable targeted remediation, each issue is further coded (e.g., B601,
B602) according to the type of vulnerability present.

      Fig. 1. Comparison of Human vs LLM Pylint Scores in box plots

We provide box plots of PyLint scores for human- and LLM-generated code
in Fig. 1, which show that human- generated code on average receives
slightly higher ratings for adhering to coding standards. LLM-generated
code, on the other hand, shows more variation; where we observed ratings
Fig. 2. Comparison of Human vs LLM Bandit Scores in a scatter plot that
range from 10 to as low as 4.8. This variation points to inconsistent
documentation handling practices or coding 1) Findings and Analysis
Across Files: standard adherence by LLMs. Also, with a wider
interquartile • Subprocess Vulnerabilities (High Severity): Subprocesses
range for LLM-generated code compared to human-generated were commonly
handled incorrectly by both human and code, the box plots highlight the
frequent irregularity in GPT-4 code, which is a serious flaw and can
result in addition to overall slightly lower code quality for LLM-
arbitrary code execution. For example, code instructions generated code.
That said, statistical testing involving t-tests meant for automation
tasks where commands were cre- to compare the mean difference in PyLint
scores of human- ated dynamically from user inputs were frequently found
and LLM-generated code did not reveal statistically significant to have
the Bandit flag B603 enabled. In another example differences (p = 0.64).
of a serious flaw, a script generated dynamically created  shell
commands without any sanitation based on external Analysis: Security
flaws are common in both human- and inputs, potentially opening the door
to command injection LLM-generated code, as demonstrated by the security
analysis vulnerabilities. In fact, in GPT-4-generated code, 40 in- of
Python code above. A wide range of problems are visible in stances of
dangerous subprocesses usage were observed, the scatter plot in Fig. 2,
with both human and LLM-generated mostly in scripts meant for file
handling and system code displaying security breaches. The median
vulnerability command executions. in the box plot in Fig. 3 for the LLM
and human codes are • Hard-coded Sensitive Data (Medium to High
Severity: similar, with human-generated code showing more outliers. T-
Several scripts were found to have hard-coded passwords test results
returned a p-value of 0.05, which is at the edge of and API keys for
both human and GPT-4 code, which statistically significant differences
(typically p \< 0.05). increases the possibility of credential leakage.
This was especially common in scripts managing API connections, Outcomes
for security flaws being common in where the API keys were
code-integrated. If unauthorised both human- and LLM-generated code,
with such individuals are able to access data or if the code is made
flaws in LLM-generated code being more severe, publicly available, such
actions may result in serious highlight the urgent need for improved
security security breaches. In fact, there were 25 instances of hard-
features across the coding divide. Accordingly, a coded sensitive data
(API keys, passwords) across both case is made in this study for
prioritising security human-written and LLM-generated scripts. in
software development and training LLMs with • Insecure Library Usage
(Low to Medium Severity): An- more secured code. other prevalent issue,
B404, includes the usage of known insecure modules like Pycrypto, which
are found in C. Code Complexity various data encryption routines. This
issue was also related to the use of redundant or vulnerable libraries.
A We used Radon in this study, a Python tool that measures particular
example includes the usage of an old version cyclomatic complexity.
Cyclomatic complexity is an objective of the Requests library in
LLM-generated code, which measure of a program's complexity and
maintainability that is known to have several vulnerabilities that may
lead to counts the number of linearly independent pathways through SSL
spoofing attacks. Outcomes revealed 18 instances of the source code
\[25\]. As part of our code quality measures, such issues in
LLM-generated scripts, mainly involving we examine the cyclomatic
complexity of the 144 (72 x 2) outdated or redundant cryptography
libraries. different Python coding files generated by humans and LLMs.
2) Further Statistical Comparisons: 1) Findings and Analysis Across
Files: • General Cyclomatic Complexity: The average code com- • High
Severity: Compared to 45% of issues in human- generated code, 60% of
issues in LLM-generated code plexity of the code generated by GPT-4 is
5.0, 61% were of high severity. higher than that of human code (average
code complexity • Medium Severity: We observed that 30% of such issues =
3.1). This may be due to the model's tendency to were found in
LLM-generated code, compared to 35% in handle more edge scenarios or
include extra checks and human-generated code. balances than would be
included by programmers. In fact, • Low Severity: Findings show that 10%
of low severity a generalised approach to code generation seems to be
issues were in LLM-generated code, compared to 20% evident for
LLM-generated code, with a code complexity in human-generated code.
range between 4.5 and 5.4 (standard deviation = 0.2). This may lead to
overfitting solutions that anticipate more scenarios than are actually
necessary. Also, LLMs may be trained on a variety of coding styles and
solutions. On the contrary, code produced by humans seems to be of
limited variety, with the range for code complexity being 2.69 to 3.91
(standard deviation = 0.4). This latter outcome indicates that humans
typically employ similar levels of abstraction and control flow
structures when solving different coding tasks. • Task-Specific
Cyclomatic Complexity: The cyclomatic complexity of coding tasks
performed by LLMs, such as Sudoku solving, appeared to be higher. This
could be be- cause LLMs provide more comprehensive responses that cover
a wider range of scenarios and incorporate extra validation and
error-checking procedures. For scripting tasks, LLMs created more
complex code for tasks where simple solutions are typical, such as data
parsing and Fig. 3. Comparison of Human vs LLM Bandit Scores in box
plots JSON POST requests. This implies a built-in bias in the  model
towards thorough, occasionally over-engineered 1) Pass and Failure
Analysis: solutions. • Pass Rate Analysis: The first step in the
research was 2) Further Analysis of Impact: to compute pass rates, a key
indicator of the code's • The inclination for LLM-generated code to be
more com- capacity to satisfy functional requirements. The human- plex
could make code review procedures and long-term generated code pass rate
was found to be 54.9%, and the software maintenance difficult. To assure
reliability and LLM-generated code pass rate was 87.3%. This notable
maintainability, more thorough testing and review cycles difference
emphasises how well the LLM performs in test might be required. As code
complexity increases, there is scenarios, indicating that code generated
by LLMs may a greater chance that errors or bugs will be missed during
adhere to functional specifications more closely. testing. In
circumstances where reliability is crucial, this could have serious
implications for software quality. Fig. 4 shows the box plots for human-
and LLM-generated code, highlighting the differences in cyclomatic
complexity. Here, it is shown that, on average, LLMs generate code that
is more complex, as seen by a higher median and a wider in- terquartile
range. Formal statistical testing using the T-test also confirms
statistical differences for human- and LLM-generated code (p \< 0.05).
Our results show that although LLMs are capable of producing coding
solutions, they frequently produce more complex code that may need more
reworking to ensure maintainability.

    Although LLMs may increase productivity by pro-
    ducing code drafts quickly, our outcomes emphasise
    how crucial it is to assess LLM-generated code for
    complexity problems prior to integrating it into
                                                                         Fig. 5. Comparison of Human vs LLM Test Scores in a scatter plot
    production systems in order to maintain its scala-
    bility and performance, especially during software                  •  Failure Analysis: In terms of the reasons for failure,
    maintenance.                                                           human-written code demonstrated a standard deviation of
                                                                           16.4 among the non-executable scripts, with an average
                                                                           of 21.6 Bandit problems recorded per script. This vari-
                                                                           ation highlights how inconsistently human-written code
                                                                           adheres to best practices. LLM-generated code that failed
                                                                           test cases (i.e., non-executable scripts) had returned a
                                                                           standard deviation of 8.6, with an average of 15.9 Bandit
                                                                           problems.
                                                                         2) Detailed Code Analysis:
                                                                         While LLM-generated code shows a high pass rate for the
                                                                      72 test cases, in certain areas human programmers tended to do
                                                                      better than LLMs. These differences are especially noticeable
                                                                      for programming tasks that require sophisticated problem-
                                                                      solving techniques, in-depth subject knowledge, or complex
                                                                      thinking. We reflect on these outcomes below.
                                                                         • Complex Logic Concepts: The task to solve the Travel-
                                                                           ling Salesman Problem using the Quantum Optimisation
                                                                           Algorithm required knowledge of optimisation methods

Fig. 4. Comparison of Human vs LLM Radon Scores in a box plots and
quantum computing principles. When comparing the human (pass rate = 75%)
programmers' solutions that D. Code Functionality and Correctness made
use of domain-specific knowledge and creative We explore how well human-
and LLM-generated code problem-solving abilities and LLMs' (pass rate =
35%) perform in a range of functional software testing conditions.
outcomes, it appeared that LLMs found it difficult to We compare
pass/fail rates and details of the types of errors integrate these
complicated concepts to provide correct, encountered to assess the
correctness of the code generated by coherent solution. Similarly, tasks
involving accurately both sources under carefully controlled testing
circumstances. reflecting on real-world dynamics in simulation activ-
These outcomes are presented and analysed below. ities require both an
understanding of the underlying  models, such as SIR models in
epidemiology, and the smaller interquartile range, indicating more
consistent perfor- flexibility to modify these models. Compared to
models mance, than does human-generated code. LLMs statistically created
by humans (pass rate = 80%), LLMs (pass rate show an overall pass
percentage of 87.3%, which is much = 45%) produced models that were less
accurate or higher than the 54.9% for human code. Statistical testing
also oversimplified. This may be because LLMs do not fully revealed
statistically significant differences between human- understand the
internal details of the model parameters and LLM-generated code (p \<
0.05). This shows how the or the implications of particular simulation
settings. LLMs may handle a larger range of cases and include more •
Context Awareness: Tasks to interface with an LLM elaborate
error-checking processes. The scatter plot in Fig. in Python were
impacted by context awareness. Inter- 5 indicates that humans do better
on tasks requiring more estingly, coding an LLM within a script
generated by in-depth domain-specific knowledge or innovative problem-
an LLM frequently reveals the meta-level knowledge solving techniques,
even if LLMs are generally more efficient that human programmers
possess. An LLM's (pass rate in standard assessments. = 50%) training
data could not accurately reflect an individual's grasp of AI and
machine learning structures, In summary, the outcome of this work shows
which allows humans (pass rate = 90%) to critically that although LLMs
are proficient at a variety of assess and refine design choices.
Similarly, this issue was programming tasks, their performance is
typically observed for a task to analyze sentiment from images worse in
domains demanding in-depth domain- using GCP. For LLMs (pass rate =
30%), tasks that call specific knowledge, complex problem-solving tech-
for unique approaches frequently pose challenges. It is niques, and high
context sensitivity. Tasks requiring generally easier for humans (pass
rate = 70%) to have a comprehensive, natural grasp of complex struc- the
creative and contextual adaptation required for certain tures,
innovative or unconventional solutions, and coding tasks. careful
debugging and error correction seem to be • Debugging and Error
Handling: Fixing a bug in the better developed by human programmers.
anagram check code that was provided revealed inter- esting details. In
order to effectively debug an issue, it is necessary to not only
recognise its existence but also V. I MPLICATIONS understand its cause
and the best way to address it without creating new mistakes. Iterative
debugging procedures Implications for Theory: By carefully assessing and
doc- require an advanced understanding of the code's function umenting
the performance of LLMs against human program- and intent, which is
where human (pass rate = 82%) mers across multiple coding
characteristics, this research has programmers excel and LLMs (pass
rate: 45%) currently filled a significant gap in the current literature
\[5\], \[11\], struggle. \[14\], \[18\]. While previous works have
explored LLMs ef- fectiveness at solving programming tasks \[26\],
\[27\] and how they are implemented in developers' workflows \[30\],
\[31\], limited research has assessed LLMs against humans. This study
advanced our awareness of LLMs' ability in supporting software
development, offering a fair assessment that takes into account both the
drawbacks and possibilities of existing LLM models. However, there is
need for additional research into LLMs' capabilities (further considered
in Section VIII). Implications for Practice: Results in this study have
numerous implications for practice. First, we provide evidence that may
guide the software engineering community on how LLMs may be integrated
into software development processes. Although there is no denying the
appeal of automating repeti- tive coding jobs, this study emphasises the
need for strict over- sight and review procedures to guarantee that the
productivity improvements from utilising LLMs do not compromise the
security and quality of the software code generated. Second, Fig. 6.
Comparison of Human vs LLM Test Scores in box plots our results advance
the current discussion concerning applying LLMs to support coding among
software engineers. We offer We visualise test case outcomes for Python
scripts written important insights that may improve the deployment
methods by humans and generated by LLMs in Fig. 5, which shows of LLMs
in software development, ensuring that they comple- that higher number
of test cases passed for LLM-generated ment rather than replace human
expertise by identifying the code across a range of tasks. This
difference is further shown precise domains in which they perform well
or poorly. These by the box plots in Fig. 6, where it is shown that LLMs
have a insights will inform software engineers.  Implications for LLM
Development and Proofing: This Pylint and Radon. Also, we have used the
guidance of pre- research not only emphasises how much LLMs may change
vious work in our consideration of appropriate and relevant software
development processes, but also how urgently im- checks \[25\]. proved
training models that put software security and quality first are needed.
We need to approach the potential transforma- VII. C ONCLUSION tion in
software development that LLMs may bring about with This research
compares the outputs produced by LLMs and cautious optimism, recognising
the advantages of automation human programmers in order to explore the
quality of code while actively reducing faulty code risks. One approach
to generated in these contexts and the complexities of software enhance
LLMs is to equip the LLM training pipeline with code generation. This
study offers detailed understandings into specialised training in safe
coding techniques. Also, developers the capabilities and constraints of
human and LLMs in the field may investigate hybrid models, in which
LLMs' outputs are of software development by investigating their outputs
across placed through a human-in-the-loop review process to improve
multiple dimensions, including code compliance to coding the generated
code and make sure it satisfies the highest standards, security,
complexity, and correctness. standards of quality and security. This way
LLMs will provide Outcomes revealed that the inclination of LLMs to
inherit the most value to software developers. and duplicate risky
coding patterns found in their training datasets is noteworthy.
Vulnerabilities including cross-site VI. T HREATS scripting were
significantly more common in code generated by the LLM (i.e., GPT-4)
studied. This highlights a crucial flaw While our study provides
evidence into LLMs and how they in the way that current LLMs' training
approaches emphasise perform against human coders, where such evidence
is scarce, learning depth over breadth, highlighting the importance of
we concede that the work suffers from a few limitations. focused
instructions that promote safe coding techniques. Our dataset comprised
tasks in relation to one programming In the coding standards assessment,
Pylint and Radon language (i.e., Python) and code developed by a fourth
year analyses showed that although LLM-generated and human- computing
student, which is limited in scope and expertise. written code both have
flaws, LLMs are more likely to make Thus, our findings may not
generalise to other programming mistakes that may be avoided by strictly
adhering to coding languages, where differing syntax and semantic
concerns could standards. Although modest, the LLM studied (and humans)
at have a major impact on the security and quality of both human times
overlooked important details in coding style and standard and LLM code
generation. In addition, our results may not procedures that are
essential for preserving readability and generalise to
situations/domains where the task requirements code quality. are
significantly different to those of the study. The complexity of the
code that was produced was one of In terms of the LLMs, we used GPT-4,
which was held to the more striking contrasts that was seen. Compared to
human- be the best performing LLM at the time of our experiment
generated code, LLMs often generated code with a higher in April 2024.
This is only one LLM, which was no doubt cyclomatic complexity. Our
outcomes suggest that LLMs tend trained on a specific dataset. This may
affect the effectiveness to over-engineer solutions, which could result
in code that is of the generated code because LLMs are typically trained
harder to maintain and more prone to errors during the later on large,
diversified datasets that may not particularly focus stages of software
development. on secured or optimised coding strategies. This constraint
That said, LLM-generated code frequently performed well might have
biased our comparison and undervalued LLMs' when tested for functional
correctness, proving LLMs' use- actual capabilities when trained
specifically to produce safe, fulness in automating simple and
well-defined coding tasks. high-quality code. Accordingly, more
realistic and balanced On the contrary, humans frequently outperformed
LLMs in comparisons may be obtained by using other LLMs that have tasks
requiring deep domain-specific expertise or complicated been trained
with a focus on secure and quality-driven coding problem-solving. These
outcomes support the view that LLMs techniques, or those that superseded
GPT-4 (e.g., GPT-4o or should complement (as opposed to replacing) human
program- GPT-o1). Also, for prompting we used a brief overviews of the
mers, where vigilance would go a long way in ensuring the task's
requirements, expected outcomes, and specific coding creation of safe
and reliable software development outcomes. guidelines for the LLM to
follow (refer to Section III.A). However, an approach that iteratively
evolves prompts with VIII. F UTURE W ORK errors detected may help to
reduce code errors, albeit that In terms of avenues for future studies,
we plan to explore would have biased out analysis. LLMs' suitability for
solving coding problems in other do- Finally, we conducted our research
using the well-known mains (e.g., for generating solutions for
enterprise applications Pylint, Radon, and Bandit tools. These tools
identify a range of and embedded devices). Also, such analysis may be
performed problems, however, there may be others that we have missed.
for other programming environments, which would add to For instance,
Flake8 combines the functionalities of Ned the body of knowledge on
LLMs' adaptability and versatility. Batchelder's McCabe, PyFlakes and
pycodestyle to provide More research is also necessary to determine the
moral and a large range of metrics. However, this tool does not provide
security implications of using LLM-generated code in soft- a thorough
security analysis, and its capabilities overlap with ware production,
given the vital role that software plays in today's society. Also,
creating best practices and frameworks \[23\] I. Ndukwe et al. (2023).
How have views on software quality differed for secure and responsible
application of LLMs in software over time? Research and practice
viewpoints. Journal of Systems and Software, 195, 111524.
10.1016/j.jss.2022.111524. development should be the main focus of
future research \[13\], \[24\] S. A. Licorish and T. Nishatharan,
"Contextual Profiling of Stack and we plan to contribute to this
research direction. Further, Overflow Java Code Security Vulnerabilities
Initial Insights from a Pilot research studies that monitor the growth
of LLMs' capabilities Study," 2021 IEEE 21st International Conference on
Software Quality, Reliability and Security Companion (QRS-C), Hainan,
China, 2021, pp. over time, especially as new models and training
approaches 1060-1068, doi: 10.1109/QRS-C55045.2021.00160. appear, may
provide important details concerning the future \[25\] S. Meldrum et
al. (2020). Understanding stack overflow code quality: of LLM technology
and its likely important impact on soft- A recommendation of caution.
Science of Computer Programming, 199, 102516.
10.1016/j.scico.2020.102516. ware development \[12\], \[15\]. We plan
such investigations by \[26\] J. Achiam et al. (2023). Gpt-4 technical
report. arXiv preprint comparing the performance of other LLMs (e.g.,
LLaMA and arXiv:2303.08774. Claude) when solving the same coding tasks
used in this study. \[27\] M. Chen et al. (2021). Evaluating Large
Language Models Trained on Code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374. \[28\]
E. Zolduoarrati et al. (2022). Impact of individualism and collectivism
R EFERENCES cultural profiles on the behaviour of software developers: A
study \[1\] J. Devlin et al., "BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional
Transformers of stack overflow. Journal of Systems and Software, 192,
111427. for Language Understanding," in Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, 2019.
10.1016/j.jss.2022.111427. \[2\] S. Liawatimena et al., "Django Web
Framework Software Metrics Mea- \[29\] E. Zolduoarrati and S. Licorish.
(2021). On the Value of En- surement Using Radon and Pylint," in Journal
of Physics: Conference couraging Gender Tolerance and Inclusiveness in
Software Engi- Series, 2021.. neering Communities. Information and
Software Technology, 139. \[3\] A. Radford et al., "Language Models are
Few-Shot Learners," in 10.1016/j.infsof.2021.106667. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2020. \[30\] S. Barke et al. (2023).
Grounded Copilot: How Programmers Interact \[4\] T. Sharma and D.
Spinellis, "Do We Need Improved Code Quality with Code-Generating
Models. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 7, OOP- Metrics?" in Proc. of the 25th
International Conference on Software SLA1, Article 78,
https://doi.org/10.1145/3586030. Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering
(SANER), 2018, pp. 1-12. \[31\] B. Tehrani et al. (2024). Evaluating
Human-AI Partnership for LLM- \[5\] S. Jin et al., "Software Code
Quality Measurement: Implications from based Code Migration. In Extended
Abstracts of the 2024 CHI Confer- Metric Distributions," in IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering, ence on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI EA '24). ACM, vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 597-614, 2023. Article
133, 1--8. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613905.3650896. \[6\] J. Ruohonen et
al. (2020). "A Large-Scale Security-Oriented Static \[32\] S. A.
Licorish and S. MacDonell. (2013). Adopting softer approaches Analysis
of Python Packages in PyPI," in Journal of Information Security in the
study of repository data: A comparative analysis, in Proceedings and
Applications, vol. 50, pp. 102-115. of the 17th International Conference
on Evaluation and Assessment in \[7\] Y. Feng et al. (2023).
"Investigating Code Generation Performance Software Engineering (EASE
2013) (Porto de Galinhas, Brazil. ACM, of ChatGPT with Crowdsourcing
Social Data," in Proceedings of the 240-245. 10.1145/2460999.2461035.
IEEE 47th Annual Computers, Software, and Applications Conference \[33\]
Liu, J., Xia, C. S., Wang, Y., and Zhang, L. 2023. Is your code
generated (COMPSAC), Torino, Italy, pp. 876-885. by ChatGPT really
correct? Rigorous evaluation of large language \[8\] I. O. Gallegos et
al., "Bias and Fairness in Large Language Models: A models for code
generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Survey," arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.00770, 2023. Systems, A. Oh, T. Naumann, A.
Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and \[9\] L. Yan et al., "Practical and
Ethical Challenges of Large Language S. Levine, Eds. Curran Associates,
Inc., 36, 21558--21572. Models in Education: A Systematic Scoping
Review," 2023 \[34\] Wang, W., Ning, H., Zhang, G., Liu, L., and Wang,
Y. 2024. \[10\] J. White et al., "A Prompt Pattern Catalog to Enhance
Prompt Engi- Rocks coding, not development: A human-centric,
experimental neering with ChatGPT," arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11382,
2023. evaluation of LLM-supported SE tasks. Proc. ACM Joint Euro- \[11\]
A. Hochmair et al. (2023). "Correctness Comparison of ChatGPT-4, pean
Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Bard, Claude-2, and
Copilot for Spatial Tasks," in Transactions in GIS, Foundations of
Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE). ACM, 32:3. Available:
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2401.02404.
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3643758. \[12\] H. Chen et al.,
"Capabilities of Large Language Models in Code \[35\] Ren, S., Guo, D.,
Lu, S., Zhou, L., Liu, S., Tang, D., Sundaresan, N., Documentation,"
2024. Zhou, M., Blanco, A., and Ma, S. 2020. CodeBLEU: a method for au-
\[13\] Z. Zhang et al., "Ethical Considerations and Policy Implications
for tomatic evaluation of code synthesis. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.10297. Large Language Models: Guiding Responsible Development
and De- \[36\] Nguyen, N., and Nadi, S. 2022. An empirical evaluation of
GitHub ployment," arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.02678, 2023. Copilot's code
suggestions. Proc. 19th Int'l Conf. on Mining Soft- \[14\] D. Das et
al., "Under the Surface: Tracking Artifactuality in LLM- ware
Repositories (MSR 2022). ACM, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 1--5. Generated
Data," arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14698v2, 2024
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3524842.3528470. \[15\] A. Radford et al.,
"Language Models are Few-Shot Learners," in \[37\] Prather, J., Reeves,
B. N., Denny, P., Becker, B. A., Leinonen, J., Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2020 Luxton-Reilly, A., Powell, G.,
Finnie-Ansley, J., and Santos, E. A. \[16\] 'S. Yao et al. "Tree of
Thoughts: Deliberate Problem Solving 2023. It's weird that it knows what
I want: Usability and interac- with Large Language Models,"
p. arXiv:2305.10601doi: tions with Copilot for novice programmers. ACM
Transactions on 10.48550/arXiv.2305.10601 Computer-Human Interaction,
31, 1, Article 1 (January 2024), 35 pages. \[17\] M. Dillmann et
al. (2024). Evaluation of large language models for
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3579590. assessing code maintainability.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12714 \[38\] Awal, M. A., Rochan, M., and Roy,
C. K. 2024. Comparing robust- \[18\] C. Fang et al. (2023). Large
language models for code analysis: Do llms ness against adversarial
attacks in code generation: LLM-generated vs. really do their job?.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12357 human-written. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.10565. \[19\] S. Dvivedi et al. (2023). A Comparative
Analysis of Large Lan- \[39\] S. Ahmed. (2024). LLM Prompt Engineering
for Beginners: guage Models for Code Documentation Generation. arXiv
preprint What It Is and How to Get Started. The Deep Hub.
arXiv:2312.10349.
https://medium.com/thedeephub/llm-prompt-engineering-for-beginners-
\[20\] G. Van Rossum et al. (2001). PEP 8: Style guide for Python code.
what-it-is-and-how-to-get-started-0c1b483d5d4f. Retrieved from
https://www.pep8.org \[40\] Arora, C., Sayeed, A. I., Licorish, S.,
Wang, F., & Treude, C. (2024). \[21\] X. Du, et al. (2024). Evaluating
Large Language Models in Class-Level Optimizing Large Language Model
Hyperparameters for Code Genera- Code Generation. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/ACM 46th International tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.10577
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE '24). ACM, Article 81, 1--13.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3597503.3639219. \[22\] Y. Chang et al. (2024).
A Survey on Evaluation of Large Lan- guage Models. ACM Trans. Intell.
Syst. Technol. 15, 3, Article 39. https://doi.org/10.1145/3641289. 
