# Abstract do artigo: 47-Is Functional Correctness Enough to Evaluate Code Language Models

**Arquivo original:** 

## Abstract

Abstract
Language models (LMs) have exhibited impressive abilities in generating codes from natural
language requirements. In this work, we highlight the diversity of code generated by LMs as
a critical criterion for evaluating their code generation capabilities, in addition to functional
correctness. Despite its practical implications,
there is a lack of studies focused on assessing
the diversity of generated code, which overlooks its importance in the development of code
LMs. We propose a systematic approach to
evaluate the diversity of generated code, utilizing various metrics for inter-code similarity as
well as functional correctness. Specifically, we
introduce a pairwise code similarity measure
that leverages large LMs’ capabilities in code
understanding and reasoning, demonstrating
the highest correlation with human judgment.
We extensively investigate the impact of various factors on the quality of generated code,
including model sizes, temperatures, training
approaches, prompting strategies, and the difficulty of input problems. Our consistent observation of a positive correlation between the test
pass score and the inter-code similarity score
indicates that current LMs tend to produce functionally correct code with limited diversity.

1

Introduction

Language models (LMs) pre-trained on massivescale code corpora show remarkable performance
in generating codes from natural language requirements. Extensive research has explored various
methods to enhance the functional correctness of
code generated by these models (Austin et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021). As a result,
recent benchmarks assessing the functional correctness of generated code (Ben Allal et al., 2022) show

---
*Extraído em 2026-06-12 23:54:36*
