# Abstract do artigo: 61-Comparing Human and LLM Generated Code The Jury is Still Out

**Arquivo original:** 

## Abstract

Abstract—Much is promised in relation to AI-supported
software development. However, there has been limited
evaluation effort in the research domain aimed at validating
the true utility of such techniques, especially when compared to
human coding outputs. We bridge this gap, where a benchmark
dataset comprising 72 distinct software engineering tasks is used
to compare the effectiveness of large language models (LLMs)
and human programmers in producing Python software code.
GPT-4 is used as a representative LLM, where for the code
generated by humans and this LLM, we evaluate code quality
and adherence to Python coding standards, code security and
vulnerabilities, code complexity and functional correctness. We
use various static analysis benchmarks, including Pylint, Radon,
Bandit and test cases. Among the notable outcomes, results
show that human-generated code recorded higher ratings for
adhering to coding standards than GPT-4. We observe security
flaws in code generated by both humans and GPT-4, however,
code generated by humans shows a greater variety of problems,
but GPT-4 code included more severe outliers. Our results show
that although GPT-4 is capable of producing coding solutions,
it frequently produces more complex code that may need more
reworking to ensure maintainability. On the contrary however,
our outcomes show that a higher number of test cases passed
for code generated by GPT-4 across a range of tasks than code
that was generated by humans. That said, GPT-4 frequently
struggles with complex problem-solving that involve in-depth
domain knowledge. This study highlights the potential utility
of LLMs for supporting software development, however, tasks
requiring comprehensive, innovative or unconventional solutions,
and careful debugging and error correction seem to be better

---
*Extraído em 2026-06-12 23:54:44*
